okay all right so I woke up this
morning and I realized a little bit
frustrated with the progress I actually
did aside from
streaming uh get pattern matching with
uh sequence patterns to work when
they're named but I didn't get it to
work otherwise but what I thought I
wanted to do today is actually just sort
of I have about an hour maybe a little
bit more than that and I just want to go
through and sort of condense down
everything that I've learned in building
this programming this symbolic
programming
language and describe exactly what it is
from scratch we don't need this this
will be good to have so that we can test
our Behavior because effectively we're
making our own Mathematica so what I'm
going to do is I'm going to start from a
blank uh uh rust project again so I'm
I'm in my uh whatever I'm going to say
cargo new cast
um then I'm just going to open up that
thing
and once we're
here we're going to wonder okay how do
we start what does it even mean to have
a symbolic programming language
and um I guess the first thing that
anyone would probably think of is what's
a symbol and how do we represent it and
so uh this gets the idea of Expressions
which is a natural thing in pretty much
every programming language is that you
have some expression that uh represents
doing some computation and so we need a
way to represent expressions in our
programming language so what we're going
to make is an enum I'll call enum
expert um and actually I'm going to
disable uh hold on we I always hate this
but whatever I'm going to disable
co-pilot because I think give my make
things a little bit
annoying just disable that for right now
just so that we can really figure out
what it is we're
doing okay so what do we need to put in
this stru well we probably need a
symbol type and
then
um
so let's just say we we have this we can
make a new we can make an
expression uh let s equal this or let's
just call it X because we're talking
about symbolic program which algebra is
very tied in with that it's not really
that important let's just try to run
it interesting so let's try to do this
see does that work we need to add this
deriv debug that's just a rust random
implementation detail that's really not
something I care about but okay so all
we have is symbol but we want to store
some data in there like the fact that
two symbols may be different so we're
going to add the fact that we can store
a string in there and so that means that
we can say that this is an thing called
X and then now I'm going to make a
slight change that's call it Sim but now
that we've introduce that it is
represents a symbol I'll call this
symbol just so that in the VOD we know
um and I wonder if I can make this take
a stir can we do
that yeah
I guess not let's just make it take
string and we'll do
this which is fine and so now when it
prints out it'll say sim X so that's
good so now we have what are the atoms
of our symbolic language so but we we
need a way to represent Expressions that
are compound that make take multiple
symbols and do things with them so we're
going to introduce the fact that
expressions are naturally treel likee
and we're going to we're going to
introduce uh
uh I'll call it uh what's a good name
for this right
now we'll call we'll call it list for
the sake of expediency as if anyone see
my older streams this is how this is
what I have in my other link whiches and
what is list list is basically going to
take a VC of experts
so now we have this compound structure
where we can say
um let L equal x per list of VC of x and
x and I think I probably have to clone
these guys but we'll
see right
clone and we get we will get to oh and I
have to now do this thing where I do
clone right
okay and now we're able to copy
expressions and the some Rust macro
learns okay I just recurse and I copy
everything and I copy everything and so
now we should be able to print
L which has 2
X's that's great but what does this
actually mean um well it turns out what
this actually means is calling the
function x with itself as an argument so
this is is actually what this operation
means uh if you're to think of the first
argument of any list representing some
operation so what we could do here is we
could make uh This
plus and we can
make one so we'll call this plus we'll
call this one and we'll just put the
character one in there and so then we'll
say plus and then we're going to do this
or actually we don't need to do that we
need to
do
one
one okay and then we're going to print
this list and so now we've started with
the most sort of fundamental thing that
we may want to do in our programming
language which is 1+
one so that's pretty good stuff but and
we'll get to actually how to evaluate
this but that's not the purpose of this
stream the purpose of this stream is to
rep to
uh to
clearly understand what it means to have
patterns and think about programming as
acting on the structure of the
arrangement of
symbols um and their values and
transforming them into something else so
um so where should we go from here well
one thing that we could do is we could
um I guess the simplest way to think
about some sort of pattern or
transformation rule between Expressions
so think about the idea that + one one
ends up going to the value two how do we
actually do that well we could store
some sort of rule just in this hashmap
in this map that says anytime that this
is our list or if we see that expression
then we can apply a rule to get down to
this this new thing so what I will do
is I'll say let uh hm or let's say rules
let rules equal hashmap and we'll add
that to our thing up here so that we can
use it and we'll say this takes an
expert and returns an
expert um and so I think I don't have to
do that yet I think it will infer that
in the the compiler and so right now
it'll
say expected
semicolon oh yeah it just expects type
oh I need
a all right so that's all good and it
says it doesn't know the types yet but
that's fine let's just add a rule to
this and I think we need to make this
mutable and we're going to say let
rules. insert and we're going to say if
we
see L and we're going to clone it
because otherwise we pass it in there
we're going to return the
symbol and I'll I'll do it here I'll say
let let two equal x per Sim 2 and then I
have to clone the string because of how
the memory thing works but that's more
of an implementation detail of course
and let's see what's wrong
here oh yeah two string that's good and
then we're going to say
two now um the simplest possible thing
oh right and so this is this is an
important thing that I I forgot to bring
up if we're going to have some
dictionary that allows us to look up
given an expression how we should
transform it then we need a notion of
expression equality we need to be able
to say hey does l actually exist oops
does l actually exist in our hashmap and
the only way to do that is to have some
notion of equality now we could write
this ourselves or we could do this thing
where we derive partial eek and eek and
I don't know a ton about these but I
know that eek allows us to say uh L
equals equals l so now we should be able
to
do and we have to clone these
guys then it clones all over the place
but who cares
um
from
derive and so now if we run our little
program um we are going to need to oh
let's see hash so we also need to be
able to Hash it and that's another one
that we can just drive
so luckily since our expressions are so
simple the rust compiler is able to
figure this out and it finds out that L
is equal to l but if we did let's see is
L equal to
1 we get false so that's good so we have
some notion of being able to say are
these two expressions
equal um and that just amounts to
basically
saying uh are each of the atoms the same
and in the same order um but so now
we're going to say this insert Rule and
we're going to we're going to define a
function that just says um
well
well before we do that let's just try to
see um how we could
uh uh apply a rule so we'll say let
new uh let's
say
um let's say let answer equal rules.
getet and we'll say if let sum this is
the
rust thing and it's basically just
saying if this is
in uh the the
hashmap we are going to look up
L we're going to say
print uh found a rule
for uh and we put l in
here do this thing forget this
why does that not work oh we need to
borrow
okay that has an
answer
of
else no
rule no rule so since we we inserted
this we should be able to say okay we we
we have the answer so we'll say found a
rule for 1+ one and the answer is two
and right now this is already I'm sure
everyone should you know be like this is
a a terrible way to do
things because we need an infinite
number of of rules in this hashmap to be
able to just do
plus um and we're probably not going to
actually do plus I think uh in this
stream because the the more General
thing is how do we represent uh
patterns and patterns are let's
see
um how do they Define patterns patterns
stand for classes of Expressions they
contain pattern objects that represent
sets of possible Expressions that's a
very good way to describe
it when several pattern objects occur
yeah so anyways the point
is how do we do something like we do in
a traditional language where we
say you know function my
plus uh a of type uh uh what is the I
64 a of type or B of type
um like how do we do this where we are
saying okay this stands for some class
of oh
yeah some class of expression well we
want to be able to say that there's some
rule there's some rule that matches that
when we try to do this lookup in a more
General sense when we look at this
expression for 1 +
one do we have something that uh is
defined there
and of course it's natural to to do this
on a more General level than just a
specific rule that is up to equality so
we're now introducing the idea of of
basically a hashmap get on a more
General level of than equality on
expressions and so the way that this is
represented is with a um special name so
we just start to introduce names that
have special meanings so
plus would naturally be plus but we
introduced the idea of a blank symbol so
let blank
equal Sim do
exper and then this is actually a list
so so we'll call this
a and what is a good way to describe why
it is we would
want blank to be a one argument function
so in Mathematica the quick and dirty
way to think about patterns is that
blank this figure can stand
for exactly one expression but it
matches any expression so if I have f
of a of B of C of D some big expression
and this can be nested and all that jazz
but we have this fundamental thing that
we're going to try to implement on our
own in our own little mini language here
and this it's basically this match
function and this match
function is this hashmap doget on a more
General level that looks at these blanks
and these patterns that stand for not
just exact equality but classes of
expression
and then how do we sort of say that
these two expressions can mean the same
thing and so this returns true and one
thing that uh I don't know if if people
that know Mathematica know this is super
cool because true is actually just a
symbol this would be the equivalent of
us
writing
um let's say this is uh true so our true
oh yeah we probably can't name it that
my
true and it's just calling it true so we
already have Boolean data types just in
the fact that we've we've started a
convention that this specific symbol
name has meaning to it and it's a very
cool idea to have a
general way to construct your own little
system of logic just by saying that this
symbol has this magical incantation that
we know to be true and it makes code
really readable I I really like
it
um uh two
stra okay but um one thing that I wanted
to as
um I guess what I'll say is that at the
end of the day every form that we look
at that in this notebook will have the
exact same structure with some caveats
in that they have different they have
more atom types like they have like a
number here for
instance um and we could do that but for
right now for our purposes it's fine to
leave one as uh uh not really a number
because we're not really going down that
rabbit hole
yet but the point is that every
expression that I type in here on this
stream and forever is going to be able
to be represent presented with this kind
of expression type where you have a tree
and so the question is what the hell is
this blank thing well we have this handy
thing called full form in Mathematica
which allows us to look at the
underlying expression form and you can
see here that the way that blank is
represented is uh as a zero argument
function and it turns out that you can
actually have have a there's an optional
one argument function for this
and we will get into that but for right
now we are just going to look at
this
um okay so it turns out that this is
ends up being a list because remember
lists represent the first argument as
the operator and the rest as the
arguments so what we're going to say is
this is a blank
Sim and then we're going to say let
blank equal expert of list of blank Sim
and I guess we'll clone it and so now
what we want to do is and we'll see
naturally that because we take the
list
um and one thing that I'm going to do to
make things a little bit more expedient
we're going to define a function called
Sim
and it takes a pointer pointer to a
string and it returns an expert and all
it does is it does expert of sim of
s.2
Str and this is just convenient so now
instead of writing this whole thing out
I can just
write Sim blank and that makes things a
little bit nicer to read but this is
just a simple helper function for uh you
know whatever um
um so now now what what's what's the
value of this this blank nonsense the
point is that we want to be able to
say you know rules. getet
of
um
well we want some way
of
um yeah we'll call it match we want we
want some
match uh we'll call it my
match that takes some
expert and some other expert and returns
a a Boolean returns true you know a
symbol of true or
false um but that is more
General than just using the implicit
equality that we have when we do this
derive eek so what we're going to do is
we're going to try to implement this
this functionality and we're only going
to start off with the the basically the
fundamental idea that if I
give if I give any expression in here
with this one being
blank then it has to be true so
basically
anything with blank goes to
true and it it would probably
be uh good to look
at
um why is blank a function
in I know sort of
why I guess
I guess what we could do is we could try
to assume that blank is
not this and it's just a symbol and see
where we break down when we try to do
stuff like uh blank of
H where this goes to blank of
H but
um all
right
so let's uh let's try to write this this
function
and um yeah we'll do everything from
scratch I'm I'm good with
that okay
so takes an exper type expert and it
takes a we'll call this the pattern type
expert so they're both Expressions but
now we're basically saying that this can
have these special symbols with called
called blanks that can that can match
anything and then we're going to return
a
Boolean so now we're going to match
on all right before I write anything
let's just think about
it
um what we can do is we can actually
match on both things which is a very
handy thing so we can match on Expert
and
pattern
does that
work right okay wait um I think I can
just do
this um okay so now if we see an
expert Sim of e and an expert Sim of P
then what does this mean this means that
we have two two of these guys we have
two symbols and if you have two symbols
the only thing that you can do is
compare their equality so this is going
to say e equal to P so that's all we can
do
here um so that's like
saying uh
does uh does
one and one match so we can add a test
case for this
already um
so we're going to say
let
xat and
expected equal
back here and we're going to say this is
going to be Sim of
one sim
of one and
true
oh okay does that
work oh wait I need to make this a
tuple I think that should be fine but
anyway we'll do for
x x
expected in oh wa oh yeah yeah no
no test
cases uh what we're going to say
is what do I do here um
assert
PE
uh uh my match of X Pat is expected
and I
think oh yeah I think I have to do this
to to
do cool so now we've we have our very
first base case and we're going to run
our
code uh and so it passed so
uh and I'm going to enumerate
these uh
I I have to
do
do and then we're going to do print
line
testing Cas I Okay cool so now we can
finally move on with our because this is
boring and then what's going wrong
here we need to
clone what's wrong with
this
okay so this would so if we change this
to false just to show
everyone
says all right well we try to compare
true with false but this is what we
want and we want another one of
these okay but now what do we want to do
now we want to
say
uh I want these to down here so I can
copy
them and I want to say that one
and blank
should we do this where blank is just a
symbol I
wonder what's going wrong
Comas yeah that seems like a good idea
so we want so I'm reverting what I I
said about making
blank a uh a list and it's not going to
be a function or anything it's just
going to be this symbol blank and what
we'll hopefully do is we'll
see how this breaks
down hey what's up
dude oh I didn't see your comment man
damn okay um
so what we're going to do
is change this
now and we're going to say if p is equal
equal to this
blank return
true
else and we're going to return this
thing and I don't think we need these
return St I think we can just do that
so now what we're going to do is we're
going to say oh this is so annoying this
forting
thing we need to make a whole bunch of
these so I'm just going to add those so
that yeah now I format and it's fine
um if I comment these out does it
still okay cool so now what we're going
to do is we're going to test again and
one is obviously not equal to blank like
the string blank is different than the
string one so these should fail if we
did this but since we're special casing
we're saying is if it's blank just
return
true cool so we expected true and that's
all good now we want to add the case
where we
have
SIM e expert
list
PS and
so as we're constructing this more
General sense of equality or or some
sort of matching
where where this can be a broader class
of expressions and we're asking do the
this does this pattern can you you know
fit it into
expression uh what does this case
actually look like this case would be
like if you had just some random X and
you matching it
with
uh yeah this is the probably the
simplest
case and is there any circumstance where
we want
this I would say no I would say this is
always going to return
false
and and when when we end up reverting
this idea that blank can only be a
symbol but is actually a list then we
will go back on that but that's
fine okay so now we want to add a test
case for that and we want to
say we we'll just
say well we'll do is we'll do
uh oh I guess I guess what I should say
here
is the reason why this case I won't
write it up the reason why this case
should return false always is because
when you think of this or this however
you look at the you know character level
representation of what this expression
actually means when you have a list by
convention we're saying the first
element of the list is the function or
operator uh with respect to the rest of
the elements in the
list so when we say you know is where am
I is X
matching uh
you know this well they're different
things fundamentally one of them is a
zero argument function and the other one
is just a symbol so this should be
false um so let's do that we'll say
exper
list
and we should expect this to be false so
let's just run it make sure that nothing
goes wrong nothing goes wrong actually
I'm going to do this so
that once it's built it should just be
fast
cool uh but now we want the good stuff
now we want to say does a list
match you want exper
of list
ease and expert of sim p and we're going
to have the exact same case as we had
here we're going to say if p is equal
equal to
blank return turn or we're going to say
true else false that's that's
it and the reason for that is that
there's no case when if we flip these
guys if we say x like this and this just
a symbol that this should ever be true
unless X is equal to our special symbol
that
says you know
uh
says uh it's like our wild card so let's
add a test case for
that and remember this thing represents
calling the function one which would be
like one which you know maybe doesn't
make much sense but for the purposes of
thinking about the structure of
Expressions I think it does so we're
gonna
what uh and then we're just going to
say and this should be true but then if
we have this with just our Sim
one this should be
false so let's run our
thing cool so none of them failed this
all does what we expect and I'll write
this out I'll say goes to uh I'll put in
one equal equal to
one so this is Sim Sim arm then here we
have SIM SIM arm with
blank this is Sim
list to
false and then this
is and what we could
do well I'm not going to get into that
right
now uh and then this is also
list Sim oh we should uh we should do
this one first list
Sim with blank so all of these ran now
the the the real good one is the list
list
on is for the
Expressions Sim Or List
PS and now what is it that we want to do
here naturally we basically just want to
um
um so what does this mean since this
blank symbol that we
have
is
fundamentally rep representing one
expression then we can start to make
assumptions on the length so if these
two things are different
lengths so if we had different lengths
meaning like f a which is I'll write it
like this f a
b and we were trying to match that with
f of blank well these are different
lengths because this blank can only
match to this
a so these should just default to fall
so if these are not
equal return
false okay so now we know that these are
the same length so what we're going to
do is we're going to actually say for e
p in es do zip it it.
zip and we're just going to recurse here
that's the simple thing um we're going
to say if not my match of e p and we
might have to clone here but we'll see
uh return false and then if we get to
the end here we do
true we got a
clone and this is I'm not worried about
efficiency right now all we're trying to
do is understand the concept of pattern
matching as a more general form of
equality and so now that we've done on
this we should be able
to uh and I'm going to define a helper
function called
list and it
takes effect of
exper
and it just does exper
list
[Music]
um then I'm also going to do one that's
uh
uh I'll do that um this takes
uh takes a de
of string now
turn
exper and
so
uh what is it iter
map we'll do s
sims
collect this is all just not I feel like
this is all literally
just rusts nonsense but whatever then we
can call list of
x's
let cool so now we have this convenient
handy function where I can just sort of
write what I want and I don't have to
bother with all of this syntactic
garbage so what should our test case be
here well we want to test first that
list
uh stirs to list of
uh we'll say
f a
b
and so let so I'll say let left hand
side go that for right now and then
we're going to copy this
over right hand
side oh one
sec yeah
come
here
uh yeah let me look at the Uber
prices
huh $18 that's not bad uh can you wear
the little green
sweater which
one the one that's like kind of
striped oh yeah the farmer
one okay yeah that
one that's a shirt though that's not a
sweatshirt it's not a shirt that's a
shirt it's a
sweater you put a shirt on under
that
yeah what okay don't just wear the
sweater all right but then I'll wear my
sweatshirt no I'll I'll give you a final
your switch
stinks yeah Fair okay wait should I
leave now yes please [__] okay all right
all right bye
bye damn I got to leave
already okay uh well let's just let's
just finish this last
part uh so so what we want is we want
the case where this blank goes to false
so we're going to
say let me move these up to the top so I
can use them my test
cases so we
want leftand
side right hand side and we want this to
be false but then we
want this
of of back
of
f
blank blank to
be true so just try to run this and then
I have to
go what
happened let's do it here so that we
don't cool so everything passed so now
we have this idea that blank can stand
for any one expression and we've written
this pattern matcher in and it turns out
that you can actually write this in much
less code if I if I'm smarter about it
but uh I guess in the next stream
maybe uh maybe tomorrow I will get into
introducing blank as a function that can
take an optional first argument which
allows ows you to do the
following match Q
of
this and this being false so basically
saying this actually let's write it as
blank
F
or blank h or G what do they call
it so basically saying does the first
argument the function name or operator
or however you want to think about it
match this first argument so in this
case f is equal to F or matches f for
instance
um so what happens if we put a blank in
here that's not true
interesting
um
oh I think if
I oh oh I think actually the reason why
if you look at the blank thing the
documentation for
blank the head in h cannot itself
contain pattern objects that's why this
doesn't work so we won't be doing that
either but anyways we'll get into this
idea that we're just going to transform
we're going to switch from thinking
about blank as just a symbol that
matches any wild card so something that
can optionally match a list
conditionally based on its what's called
Head in mathematical terminology so I
feel like this is a pretty good start
it's like a 100 lines of code that gets
you started with blank pattern
matching but we're going to extend this
uh to
the
um
uh all right I I got to go but the the
the idea that we can
actually uh do uh sequences that can
stand for yeah this is a good
example where there's is two underscores
here and if you give it this thing then
it looks at the length of what it
matched
yeah so you see here that X Y and Z
turns into a
list that gets matched and we say
three but
since yeah all right that's a good
stopping point I think that this is a
good piece of code to study to think
about how do you start building a
symbolic programming language